In the room of the Scenic Road Press, that's a gorgeous letter.
The same size as the one that Morris had that's now at the Huntington Library.
See, he had one fat size and he had three that are higher than your shoulder, as in that picture.
Right next to this press, we have a computer, quite a modern computer, an IBM, and I gather you have a software catalog.
Notebook 2.
Okay.
Which was recommended by the Rare Book Library in Stanford as being the most advanced cataloging program.
And you have just entered the 2,102.
102 Morris item in your catalog.
Yeah.
And you feel you have a thousand more to go.
Just a thousand.
A thousand more of your items to catalog?
Yes.
Okay.
Now, this is essentially the printing library.
So you were talking about some of these things about collecting down there and up here.
Mostly books.
Oh, here, let me show you.
The Morgan Library.
Oh.
I've got to write this down.
I can get that from the Morgan.
I wanted to get the case.
1976.
Yeah, they have these, by the way.
1976, William Morris and the Art of the Book.
Beautiful.
And you had a number of?
Yeah.
Well, there we really felt we were in good company.
Look at this.
Lenders.
Look at the lenders.
Birmingham City Museums, the Bodleian Library, the British Library, Cambridge University Press, the Doheny Memorial Library, the Fitzway Museum, the Gloria Club, Metropolitan Museum of Art, St.
Bride Printing Library, Society of Antiquaries, the Victorian Album Museum, Sanford Albury, I don't know, Breslauer.
He's a dealer.
And Paul Mellon is in there.
Gordon Ray is very important.
John A. Sacks, he had a store on Fifth Avenue.
They were sitting next to each other at lunch one day.
Oh, my God.
At the opening of this exhibit.
And he asked Cynthia what he did.
And he said, I'm an architect.
And his name is John A. Sacks.
He said, what are you doing?
He said, I'm in that.
What do you think?
I have some stores.
That's what he said.
And here's Norman H. Starks.
Norman H. Starks.
That looks like a very important book for me to get.
Yeah.
And they're all in print.
I know that.
This tells you more about Morris.
See, now here's one of the examples where he worked with the commercial printer to try to improve their typography.
He was kind of miffed though, right?
Oh, he was.
I won't say the other word.
But he did design.
But this is a great thing.
Here's his hand illumination.
This is the Aeneid that Andrew Lloyd Webber just bought.
I'll show you.
Andrew Lloyd Webber is the Phantom of the Opera guy.
And the Les Miserables.
Les Miserables.
He's a major Morris collector.
Which nobody realized until he bought
$2 million worth from the Doheny Morris.
Were you representative of that sale?
Yeah, I got it.
Oh, you did, yeah.
Oh, here, I was going to show you the, at the night of the opening of this exhibit.
Oh.
I think I read some of these.
Here's John M. Crawford.
For Sandy Berger, so glad we met last.
It's really John M. Crawford, Jr.
He is the fellow that... Major Morris collector who traded with Norman Strauss for the Cobden Sanderson.
It's a great collector's story.
And this is Charles Ryskamp, who was the head of the Morgan.
The head of the Morgan.
I think he left to go to the first.
Sandy Berger, a collector of discrimination, distinction, and a friend of Morris and of all who loved the book.
Charles Ryskamp.
But best wishes to Sandy Berger, one of our most generous lenders, Paul Needham, who just went over to Selfies, by the way.
Right.
Yes, he did.
John Dreyfus, he wrote one of the essays.
He's the typographic.
Well, he was the assistant printer at the Cambridge University Press while Brooke Crooksley was there, and then he was a consultant to the Monotype Coal.
But anyway.
Joe, what's it for?
Sandy, who scooped
The type designs of William and who shared... W.M.
William Morris, I'm sorry, W.M., and who shares everything underlined with such abundant enthusiasm and generosity.
John Dreyfus.
And then Joe Dunlap is the great scholar and collector in New York.
in the Library of Columbia is retired.
To Sandy, to whom?
Mauricians.
Mauricians, M-O-R-R-I-S-I-A-N-S, will be ever indebted cordially jail time.
This is the pantheon, I suppose.
Tomorrow's involvement.
That was a thrill.
Yeah.
John Dreyfus wrote that.
Oh, this is it.
This fellow, John Walsdorf, he's the
North American representative for Blackwell, a bookseller from Oxford.
He got into collecting Morris, and he ended up publishing William Morris in private press and limited edition.
Oh, this is a great page here.
It's got the Tunnel Road Press.
Oh, you're in there.
He's got the Scenic Road Press.
several examples where I did the typographic layout for a printer in San Francisco.
He's got that.
You have become a printer within the last 20 or so years then.
Here's piece number one.
Christmas of 1970 or New Year's.
I guess because if you became, if you got involved in Morris in 60, 65, it couldn't have been prior to that.
That was the first item produced at the time of year.
Yeah, this is the first item produced at the Tunnelo Press, Berkeley, California, set in 36-point and 18-point number one, Baskerville.
Types and printed with an Albion hand press, which is this over here, on Blake Moffitt, M-O-F-F-E-T-T, and Town, T-O-W-M-E, or Tender Coverstock.
Merry Christmas, Happy New Year, Stephen, Jeff, Helen, and Sanford.
Oh, that was a Christmas greeting.
It was.
See, it's folded.
I cut it in half just to cut it down.
Those are the names of the boys, Kip, Stephen, that's the E-B-E-N, and Jeff.
Kip is short for letters.
Kip is Kip.
That's his name.
Morris is chief designer and sort of right-hand man.
He took him in when he was about 16 or 17 and taught him everything.
And he actually succeeded Morris when Morris died, and he continued as the design manager of the company.
But I have, and his name is J. H. John Henry Durell, D-E-A-R-L-E, Durell.
I have several of his sketchbooks, and one has this portrait of Morris that Durell did.
You want to read a naughty thing?
Read this one.
The over 700 watercolor drawings of those very same windows.
Project them simultaneously and see the comparison between...
I'm just going to tape off the first half, but as a group you've been doing this?
No, no, just Helen and me.
Just Helen and you're going through?
185 churches.
And where are they all located?
All over England.
See, like this next year, we're going on the end of September and October.
We'll be starting out from London and going east, south, a little south.
There's a whole bunch over there and over to the Isle of Wight.
And the goal is to document.
Document all the windows that have survived, because there's a lot of redundancy.
That's what they declare the church when there aren't enough people who go in the church to keep it up.
They close it.
And only recently have they organized a system of either protecting or getting the windows out of there before the kids get out and bust it.
Here is the collector, by the way.
It's preserving.
By the way, this is— Yeah, it's going to be a— But I mean, this is where the collector comes in and saves things.
Here's the Berne Jones cartoon from St.
Francis.
Explain to my wife what a cartoon is.
I think you'd probably— It's a full-size drawing from which a window or a tapestry or anything—this you could call a cartoon.
I call them color separations for the woodblock cutter.
for the printed fabric.
Each different color needs a separate block, full-size, careful, because that's what the craftsman is going to execute from, is whatever you put on that cartoon.
And it's full-size, too, which is very important.
It's always full-size.
Morris and Company would reuse designs.
They had a very organized system of
photographic files, which we have five of.
I'll show them to you.
These are all rolled-up, full-size cartoons of windows.
These three come on a window that's 25 feet tall.
They're most incredible.
And the only time we've ever seen them on the road was one in the museum in Monterey.
had an exhibit, and they got the fire department from across the street to bring in their twenty-four.
And the firemen climbed up the ladder and mounted these from near the roof.
Cartoons are spelled the same way.
Like a cartoon.
Like a cartoon, yeah.
Yeah, it was just a spectacular thing.
Now, here's one of the most important documents that was in the archives.
These are the Morris Company archives, which you acquired.
On block, by the way?
Let's say the last block, and I can explain how it happened to be still intact.
These are the formulas for the dyes for the printed fabrics with swatches.
Each page has a swatch.
Documents.
Incredible.
Oh, let's see.
I just want to touch it.
May I?
Oh, sure.
First, I want to show you.
See, that's this design there called Strawberry Thief on Mat Claw.
That's page 49.
Yeah.
Feel this one.
That's it.
These are marvelous.
If you want to touch some of them, please do.
Oh, God.
There's another beautiful one that I've never seen.
Now, are these maintained by a number of different people, or is this basically one individual journal, do you think, or is this the company's journal?
This is the company's journal.
So any number of different people would contribute items to this.
See, when they would want to make another batch and get it the same as the previous batch,
And if they found there was a problem, they would cross it out.
So this has very technical information.
Oh, okay.
This is the chemical for me.
Can you describe the information contained to the right of each swatch?
What basically is that?
That tells you how to produce?
How to the sequence of the materials and chemicals in order to reproduce a subsequent batch.
So using this, some designer could replicate.
Okay.
Now, there's a woman from New York, Virginia Davis, who has, let's see, been here on two separate occasions and done a great deal of research and actually executed.
She is, by, let's say, profession, a dyer.
And she has published in a magazine about dying,
And in the article, she cautions amateurs, be aware these are very serious, dangerous chemicals, so don't approach it lightly.
There are acids and all kinds of things.
Yeah, but this is almost the Rosetta Stone to making a Morris fabric.
Exactly.
This tells you how to do it.
This tells you what it takes.
It doesn't give you the technique and the experience of how to handle it.
It gives you the table.
That's right.
It gives you the menu, I guess.
The recipe.
There's the word.
This is the recipe.
But it doesn't make you a chef.
You got it.
There you go.
But these things they found were the wrong amounts, so they altered them.
So this is the working shop book.
What do they call it?
The Merton Abbey Dye book.
M-E-R-T-O-N Abbey Dye book.
And everybody knows it.
It keeps getting, I allow it to be published, you know, pages from it.
Who owns the copyright on it?
Or is the copyright lapsed?
I think I do.
And if anybody wants to publish extracts for that, they need your permission?
Your permission.
Do you give it?
Yeah.
This box.
Early proofs of initials and ornaments from the original wood box, Kelskart Press.
Good.
Three sets of these pulled, three sets of these proofs made when the press closed, and just before they gave all the woodblocks to the British Museum Library, they made these three sets.
One is at the British Museum, one's at the Morgan Library, and one's there.
Look at that old label from Morris Company.
What some people would do just to get on with one of those labels.
Oh, yeah.
Never mind this stuff.
Yeah.
That's a very desirable ephemera in its own way, isn't it?
This one?
Yeah.
This is a long.
See, these are original pieces in three different colors.
Well, they have retained.
Just brilliant.
They haven't lost a thing.
They haven't faded at all.
But they haven't faded even slightly.
How old did you say that fabric is?
Probably 1874.
116 years.
Wow.
Now these are watercolor designs done by Durrell, remember J.H.
Durrell, in 1924.
for the church at Cranbrook near Detroit.
See, this is the Old Testament and the New Testament.
Cranbrook is a school started by a guy, his last name was Booth.
He brought Eliel Saarinen over from Sweden.
to start the school as a school as well as design the building.
He was an architect.
And then you may know Eliel's son, Eero Saarinen, who designed the TWA Terminal in New York and the Dulles in Washington, D.C.
But this was designed for tapestries.
They're twenty-one foot nine tall.
Twenty-one foot nine tall.
At the school, before Saarinen came, Booth had hired Bertram Grosvenor Goodhue, the architect, to do the Gothic building.
Incidentally, Goodhue was also a very good typographer, and his early work was pure Morris.
Come here, let me show you a Goodhue .
I've got some catalogs from my good friends, Ann and David Bromer.
Yes, we know them.
Very well.
Yeah, they've been here.
Have they?
Yeah.
Here we go.
Yeah, as a matter of fact, that box I just showed you of the proofs from the woodblock I got from the Bromer.
Really?
Look at that.
That's a booming, a boomer.
And what do we call this stuff?
Well, this is a border.
Okay.
But you can see Goofy, who was very much influenced the proportion of the... Very amazing.
It's very... You'd think of it.
It really was.
See, there's a woman called Susan Thompson, American Book Design and William Morris.
And she, this is her thesis, her PhD, on the same subject, of
the influence on Morris on all the American print of a book.
I mean, derivative is too mild a word.
Oh, no.
So she has analyzed or gathered together all the people who have strongly influenced.
I'm going to take a picture.
This is a child Morris chair.
I think it's child Morris chair.
With Brother Rabbit.
That was her little chair.
I love it.
I've never seen anything like that.
I keep this here.
It keeps my light on.
Oh, boy.
I just want to... Oh, look at it.
Oh, yeah.
Put that into it.
Yeah, I think it's hard, but I think it's okay.
That's almost worth a couple of shots, isn't it?
Would you like to sit in one of those chairs?
It's gently right here.
Oh, this is so, I mean, yeah, it's breathtaking.
That's the picture.
Did you just see them all sometime?
Let me tell you the story.
Let's get this.
What do you think I was shooting?
I mean, I got that in there.
That museum in Monterey actually has done three separate exhibits over the years.
The first one was the stained glass, the second one was the textiles, and the third one was the typography.
So, for here, I'll just jump over.
For here, we can look.
They did some nice publicity for invitation.
I gave a talk.
That was in 1979.
And they built—see, they couldn't afford to build the whole frame, so they built a backlighted box and stood the ten figures up, so they were still a great spectacle.
But these are some of those rolls you saw in the closet unrolled.
She's always watching the show.
The 25-foot ones keep going up to the gable.
Here, you can see it.
Excuse me.
Yeah, see, this has a gable roof.
And that drawing went right up to the peak.
It was really... I had never seen it.
But these are some marvelous drawings.
I hate to keep them rolled up because you can't look at them.
So this is, in other words, a neat room.
This is the Morris room, right?
What a wonderful exhibition.
Then here's of those 140 drawings.
Here you can see them.
Not all of them, but a lot of them.
And with the watercolor drawings, which I'll show you some of them.
They're jewel-like drawings.
Then for the textiles, I proposed
but they built a replica of his Oxford Street showroom.
That's a good idea.
Here it is.
See, there it is on Oxford Street.
So they took this photograph, duplicated it.
We picked out things to furnish it with the two jugs and the desk.
Oh, isn't that nice.
And you entered the exhibit.
through the door.
See, you came in through here.
See the floor?
What a wonderful idea.
And then you were in the exhibit.
Oh, this stuff was just magnificent.
Now, this was right down, this is here in Monterey.
I'm sure that what occasion this is is the happy coincidence that you're a neighbor.
And then the third exhibit was the—oh, this is all the wallpapers.
Would you say this is the most extensive show that has been mounted at your holdings, principally your holdings?
Let's put it this way.
See, these are three separate shows, each one of which went into greater depth than either the Stanford exhibit that tried to include everything,
or the UC Berkeley exhibit that included everything.
So, more material in the total of these three shows than either one of those.
That's awfully nice.
Now, here's the typography.
These were the two curators.
Monterey Peninsula Museum of Life.
And that was in 85?
Yeah.
September, October, and November 85.
See, we took the press over there.
Oh, those poor guys here.
Look at them trying to get it back in the van.
But along with everything to do with typography, we had a single piece of the window, a single woven fabric, printed fabric, just one example of it.
There's the carpet that you saw at the top of the stairs.
Yeah, it was magnificent.
That's our Chaucer, isn't it, no?
No, that's one of the other books.
The Chaucer was all in this case here.
How did you feel about having all of your things out of the house like that?
Do you feel like a parent?
It was empty.
You're seeing your kid go out and test date?
I mean, can't wait till they come home.
We kept going over there to look at them, see if they were tucked in.
But it was a great show.
They really just did everything they could possibly.
They had all of these cases built for this exhibit.
They were well protected.
Oh, in that box, those proofs of the woodblock, here they are all the way around the room.
We used it like a freeze.
That was impressive.
Good turnout?
Oh, like that never had before.
I bet they came from all over for us.
They did.
Yeah, that's how I'm saying.
I was looking at the marks.
That's ceramics.
Read the middle line first.
to the fortune of the maid who was called cinder maid and was afterwards a queen.
I don't know what it is already.
How her sisters would go to the prince's feast without her, but her godmother gave her the shoes of glass wherewith she went to the prince's feast and danced with him.
How she lost her shoe of glass at the feast and how the prince
made to be cried that he would wit her that he could wear the shoe and how cinder made alone could wear it the whole story morris told it in three months is that the genesis of the story no i don't know i wonder why cinder made though how did we find cinder made that is his which can you tell me a little bit about these about these she took the cinders out what can you tell me the burn jones design
And this was done in the first year of the company, because all they needed was a kiln for a six-inch square tile.
So it was before they really got organized.
Where did this repose?
Where was this?
I'm not sure.
The only copy that's mounted like this is one other set.
What would you call it?
I mean, I'm just curious.
What was it made for?
It was made to go over a fireplace.
A fireplace.
Probably.
Do you have a picture of it?
He wrote to me that he had this.
Did they try to give you a provenance when they have one?
If they have one.
But he didn't know, because I have one.
He didn't know the word.
Who is it that tries to ascertain
Authenticity, you or the dealer for both?
Oh, both.
All the good dealers always try to.
Partly they're interested, but partly they know who we sang earlier.
Have you ever unwittingly gotten any forgeries?
No.
You'd know them, of course.
That's your calligraphy.
This is the first card catalog I've ever seen in beautiful calligraphy.
That's okay.
It's his card catalog of his possessions.
No, but I think it's funny.
The way I practiced, first of all, being an architect, I was pretty good at lettering.
But it also happened when I got started doing it.
that I was on the Berkeley Planning Commission, and I would sit up there, you know, in the council chambers, behind the big desk there, and most people, I think, thought I was taking copious notes on the proceedings.
Actually, I was sitting there,
That's your calligraphy?
Yeah.
That's extraordinary.
That's beautiful.
I always practice.
While the meetings are going on, while you should be paying attention to... I was paying attention.
The implication that I wasn't paying attention.
I'm teasing.
How dare you.
During the meeting.
That's what others might call doodling, but you made it very productive.
Right.
Book collector, antique collection.
He's trying out words.
Combination of letters together.
All the important people.
Sidney Cockrell's secretary.
Oh, this is magnificent.
How do you get such thick characters?
Just a thicker pen.
Is that right?
Yeah, the various thicknesses of pen pie.
That's quite a fine.
spiky kind of way.
I have the correspondence between Quaritch and Ellis, who is Morris' associate and editor on several of the books, when they were negotiating for Quaritch to be the publisher of the first Countess Press book, in which it stated
that Morris will have sole selection of the type, the paper, the this, the that, and the printer.
Because originally, Morris intended to do typographic layout, but then have a commercial printer actually execute it.
And at some point, he decided, if you're going to have control, you've got to have presses, hire the compositors and the press and the whole thing.
So if you want total control of what you're doing,
That is the ultimate.
Now study that carefully.
All right.
Okay.
Directly from his own wool.
Now there's nobody else you can blame.
You've got to do total control.
No middle.
Now here's that idea.
Total control in a phrase.
That's it.
And when he selected, he had the paper made to order.
He had the ink made to order.
He designed his own type.
He examined everything.
You should see the minute changes that I have on proof sheets to the final sheet, things you wouldn't believe.
This looks like a block.
It's a wood block for the pink and rose wallpaper.
That's the actual block.
That's the actual block they would print out.
How large would it be to make the whole swath?
I mean, that's just a... There was another section, and then it repeated from that.
This was the width of the roll.
Which is about 2 1⁄2, 3 feet, I would say.
Not quite.
More like 12 to there.
Pretty close.
Nine more.
21 inches.
And how high about?
And then high would be about more like, I think, 19, so that would be about 38-inch vertical repeat.
That's where, see, in order to avoid seeing where block meets block, they would camouflage it by doing that.
And the other one would fit in.
It doesn't fit in.
You print with this one, take it away, then bring the next block and register it right where this line was.
Up there are, let's say, the boards from the various exhibits.
There's a full-size drawing by Marth for one of these designs, the cartoon and other.
And then he took a red pen line and delineated where the matching edges should be so that it's not
It's not legible.
While I was shooting the picture, you were just telling us what it was.
Could you tell us what that is?
Let me tell you this much.
It was designed by Mark.
You can have catalogs for each of the different crafts that they produce, and you could buy either the design to embroider it yourself,
Which, incidentally, Fitzwilliam produces it.
Exactly.
You could buy a kit like that.
Or you could have Morris and Company actually do it.
That's the way to go.
And then you could also... It's flowers, right?
Then you could also order it in the frame already.
See?
And they've made the full place.
Mark Moss was almost a visionary, wasn't he?
I mean, he seems to have done things as no one else had conceived of doing.
Yeah, nobody has done this before.
Was he a modern man, in your view, or was he a 19th century man, I wonder?
It's a curious thing how he would lecture and advocate that
Before you try to do any craft, you must go back and learn everything about it that's been done.
And then, having been discerning about what you've been learning or looking at, then sit down and do it your own way.
But with that wealth of experience,
of everything that's been done before.
And then he would do that in a lot of his writing, where he would take a story and then retell it in his own way.
Or when he did translation, he translated from Greek, from Latin, from French.
He would, let's say, update some of the early, early English.
He then wanted to do all the Norse sagas and the Icelandic sagas, so he hired a professor of Icelandic who was teaching in England, learned Icelandic.
I can show you a manuscript where the teacher and Morris would work together.
You knew nothing about this when you bought that first book in 1965.
What I'm saying is that the passion seems to have... Item number one.
That's it.
That's the facsimile.
Facsimile of the William R. Helmscott Chaucer.
And you bought it, why did you have $10?
$10.75.
It was marked down.
It was a used bookstore.
And I opened it to these pages.
I mean, you open that page there, and you've never seen anything like it, except, as I mentioned earlier, about my father being able to do things like that.
My father loved to do this kind of leaf design overnight.
And this is what you saw?
So this was the first thing.
Then I brought it home and read this introduction.
By Jante Winterech, W-I-N-T-E-R-S-E-H.
This was published in 1958.
a facsimile of the white pigskin binding.
So then, as I mentioned, I went over to Howells, and I'll show you the first book.
There it is.
That's pretty beautiful.
Yeah, I'm going to have to, I'm afraid.
This is the first one.
Oh, God, that's wonderful.
Pick it up and hold it.
The Life and Death of Jason, J-A-S-O-N, by William Morris.
So soft, isn't it?
No, that's the vellum.
It's the vellum.
And it's also from the library of Edward Gwynn Jones.
And that book plate was printed at the Kelmscott Press.
The Grange North, End Road, Fulham, if you know H-A-N.
Ex-Lewis Templeton and Crocker.
Hang on to the book.
Did he make his own paper?
He had it made.
He went to the papermaker's factory and actually made the first sheet.
Oh, it's inscribed.
Look at this.
to Edward Byrne Jones from W.M.
June 30, 1895.
An inscribed copy.
That's a pretty good inscription.
We also call it a great association.
That's a win.
Look at that.
Oh, God.
I'm holding in my hands.
This is the book.
I'm holding in my hands the item that launched an obsession, I think.
Right.
Yeah.
The condition is extraordinary.
It does.
It didn't flux at all, either, did it?
No, no.
Do any of his books flux?
Yeah.
Some do.
This is extraordinary.
So it was kept, it was maintained with love.
Oh, yeah.
Never amused.
So often you see beautiful things that... Doubled in progress, first of all,
He was very discerning as a collection.
And this was Templeton Crocker's collection that you ultimately acquired?
Yes.
And from that point— He collected in many, many fields, but this is the— The keystone?
The Kelmstock part of it.
Catalog of the Library of Charles Templeton Crocker.
And you'll find in there the section on Kelmscock.
I'm going to have to find this.
Hillsborough, California, 1918.
I'm sure he has.
I have to write that down.
This is the story of a glittering plane by William Morris.
And this is the first book published by the Kelmscott Press.
This also is from T.J.
Cobden, C-O-B-D-E-N hyphen Sanderson, this is the E-R-S-O-N, also from the Library of Templeton-Crocker.
And you recognize this name?
That's the Doves Press.
And this is a book plate printed at the Doves Press.
Wow.
And Templeton-Crocker had twelve Cobden-Sanderson Association copies.
Look at the conditions.
The first book, I'll show you another copy of the first book in what I think rightfully is called An Exhibition of Minding.
I'll bring it up.
Oh boy.
Well, we're holding here, Story of the Glittering Plain, again, William Morris.
How would you describe this lining?
Oh, my God.
Sorry to open it.
It's a good lining.
I never opened a book all the way.
It's a linen.
No, that's called...
I don't believe it.
Do I believe what I'm reading inside?
That's that ambiguous English language I was telling you about.
Yeah.
It says inside.
Whose hand did you think this is in?
It's not Morris's.
No, no.
But it says the first book printed at the Kelmscott Press.
Now, does that mean it's the first copy of the first book?
I wonder.
That's the ambiguity.
But I think that with that binding,
Are there any other copies of this book that you know of with this binding?
How can I know of?
Is there anything else that would distinguish it other than the binding?
There's no other identification.
Is this a Morris design?
No.
It's designed by Riviere and Son, who are London bookbinders, but it's obviously inspired by Morris's order.
You have to hold it with a major book.
My guess, may I make it, may I, uh, it's the first book published at the Colm Sky Press.
I like that idea, but I can't prove it.
You can't, sir.
But I'm looking at what I see, which is an extraordinary.
But that's the trouble with this language.
It's the trouble with this passion, too, when you're going to be sure.
Was that case made for it when it was issued, do you think?
Yes.
Again, there's another piece of evidence.
Here's the literary silk, the ivory button, the whole thing.
With the background that you have, do you have any gifts?
We can't.
There's nothing.
I've never read anything that would refer to this particular copy.
It says the first book.
...exams to Oxford.
Morris is studying for the entry exams at Oxford.
These are the Odes of Horace.
And here's a drawing by Morris of a peg-legged man holding up a signboard saying, W. Morris is Horace.
That's cute.
And I got Father Monaghan to translate this Latin writing here, which translates, a proposition is said to be converted, of which the extremes are transposed.
What does it mean?
Just exactly what it says.
Now, if you want it in Latin, the same thing in Latin.
And he says it on the other hand.
There it is.
William Morris, W. Morris.
W. Morris.
March 21.
March 21, 1851.
That looks like a seven, but it's the crossbar of the five.
And then DCA, nobody's been able to translate.
But here's a drawing of the church and the spire.
See, when Morris was three years old, he could read.
By the time he was four, he had read all of Scott's Waverly novels.
His father would take him—his father was a stock and bonds dealer who had a bunch of copper-mining things that suddenly became enormously valuable.
So, Morris grew up as a child, one of eight of his children.
but the only one who had the genius, but in a wealthy family.
And his father was well-educated and would take Morris as just a child to visit churches and cathedrals and all the important buildings.
And Morris absorbed and read everything he could get out and remembered, understood and remembered everything from day one.
And this, again, was from a dealer?
Yeah.
Do these dealers offer these things to you generally, do you think?
I mean, before they catalog them, would you get a call and say, Sandy, I've got something you've got to have, right?
Frequently.
And what do you say when they tell you you've got to have it?
I first have to say, how much?
And then they will, if I say, sounds like it, then they'll send it really on approval, but I don't think they'll ever send it.
There's a wonderful story in the book, Infinite Riches.
where it describes you going up to... You read that.
Yeah, you read that, yeah.
Yeah.
He was a great dealer.
David McGee.
You actually went, you know, I mean, you said, I think, at some point, these are no longer, be very careful, these are no longer yours.
I mean... And that was even before I'd gotten hell out of it.
You should be very careful with my experience.
These aren't yours anymore.
As a matter of fact, what had happened...
Those rolled-up drawings.
He was carrying a bunch, and he dropped them.
That's why I said it.
The rolled-up drawings we just saw in the closet.
In the closet, yeah.
And as I recall, you dropped everything to go see that stuff.
Oh.
Whatever it was that you were doing it at the beginning of the day.
Oh, yeah.
He said I broke the speed limits driving from Berkeley to Stanford.
What was it?
Three.
Okay.
I would be pleased if I could claim that my wife Helen and I started with the goal of assembling a collection of examples of every medium in which William Morris and his colleagues worked.
The fact of the matter is that our collection began December 1965 with the modest goal
All right.
I do not wish to seem mystical or superstitious, but it was as if the collection willed itself into being.
Our success probably can be accounted for by, quote, having been in the right place at the right time, close quote, except that there have been so many coincidences.
And that's true.
That's the spooky part.
Yeah, and that's what makes it a wonderful thing, wonderful.
Yeah.
It was a fantastic bunch of unique stuff.
So they bought it at the Cockrells sale, and it was the ephemera letters, stuff like that.
Stuff like that.
You said, as you said, Kelmscott Press.
The first two to three years was only Kelmscott Press.
Of your collection.
Of our collection.
Okay.
Kelmscott Press, only at the beginning.
Only at the beginning.
And as you just said, William Morris Company was a totally separate operation from the press.
Right.
But now you've decided to take the plunge and go from... This was the trigger.
The embroidered fire screen.
The embroidered fire screen changed it, which was just for admiring.
And I said, okay, I'll take it.
And I said, may I have the photograph and the shirt?
I put it in an envelope.
And I had already a date to meet Helen for lunch.
So we met at the restaurant.
ordered a drink, and I took the photograph out and said, I bought it.
And she said, that's nice, thinking I had bought the photograph.
And then when I said, no, I bought the window, her first words were, what are you going to do with it?
I'm going to mad at it.
Just as you said now.
It's gorgeous as it is.
What are you going to do with it?
Sandy, where's she from?
This is one of the translations by William Morris and Erika Magnusson of one of the Icelandic sagas, and it's one of twelve copies for private circulation only.
It's got Byrne-Jones, Townscott Press bookplate, inscribed to Ned from W.M., Ned being Edward.
page, Caraja Morris has illuminated as a gift to E.B.J.
Edward Bernard Jones.
It's unique.
Oh, yeah.
This was 1870, and that was the year that he did the illuminated
book called Book of Verse that he gave to Georgiana Berne-Jones.
The story of the Volsung, V-O-L-S-U-N-G-S, and Niblungs, N-I-B-L-U-N-G-S, Chapter 1.
And on this page, a little circle at the bottom, E-E-J, which you've already described.
And it's a prologan verse on the page somewhere around, Morris.
So beautiful.
See, Morris
did illuminated manuscript work as relaxation on weekends.
Oh, my boy.
Relaxation.
Mine must have been incredible.
These are two of the manuscripts you get.
The Book of Earth, the same year as the Volsungs and the Negroes, he designed the binder to the marvelous facsimiles, and to Georgiana Byrne-Jones.
But you can see the title page.
That was done by Charles Fairfax Murray,
who was a painting assistant to Bernard Jones, but Morris would hire him to do the miniaturization of some of those figure drawings that I have shown you.
And I'll show you that this is entirely by hand by modern.
No, this is a facsimile here.
This is a facsimile.
The original's at the Victorian Album.
And he got Byrne Jones to do that painting.
Well, you've got to do something to relax.
Oh, my God.
It's incredibly long.
Weekend.
I didn't know anybody.
You know, illuminated manuscripts are something that was supposed to be done over the Renaissance.
It did.
Here, hold on to this painting.
It's quite a lovely facsimile.
It's a beautiful facsimile.
They did a cheaper copy of it, which is also very good.
This was a special edition.
Generosity, charity, justice, mercy, humility.
Here are two studies for this lady here.
He would have Charles Fairfax Murray do the actual painting on this scale.
Another example.
So you can see, here's 1870.
The first Kelskot Press book is 1891, so he's well into proportion of margins and the whole concept of Booker.
Now, another one.
You'd love to have that book in your collection, wouldn't you?
It's hard to get things away from .
It's equally hard to get things away from the British Library, who has the original .
This he also did for George Adams.
He would just do one copy of it.
Oh, yeah.
God, can you imagine doing another?
Yeah, but what I'm saying is that there would be no attempt to do... No commercialization?
No.
Look at the lady sitting in the chair there.
That is she?
So these are working sketches?
The concept stage.
How did he survive, would you say?
This was all in the archives.
They must have been among these drapery studies for windows.
And as you mentioned, as he scooped up all the window-related documents, he scooped everything inside, I'm sure.
I wouldn't have left the dust.
That's a great story.
Yeah, so that's how these guys, that's part of this 140.
And how have you, it must have taken you a tremendous amount of time to make the connection between those things and those things.
It did, it did.
But tell me about, you got these things, what happens?
What do you say to yourself?
I'm going to find out what these things are for.
Absolutely.
I mean, is this something you know you're going to do intuitively or immediately?
What happens?
You get this and what do you say?
Just know it has to be done.
What was that for?
And so then, when you find it, you say what?
Wow!
I don't mean to put words in your mouth.
That's it.
That's the right word.
See, and then, it took a long time to find, to identify which drawing went with which figure in which window.
Oh, you did the window search, too.
Oh, that's where it loads.
Now, this is what I was saying.
We had 700 of these jewel-like drawers.
Did this also come to the archives?
This is part of the archives.
How large was the archives?
Two crates, each one the size of an automobile.
God.
Just look.
How could England allow that to leave the country?
Oh, I think there had to be illegal.
I don't want to use the word smuggle.
I mean, because...